#summary Contains an archive of all current and past news associated with the project.
#labels Featured

=Multi-Language Translation Script - Project News=

 * *22nd January 2010*: Version 0.2.5 of script released! This update fixes a bug that could cause script errors and crashes on certain sites - please see the [http://code.google.com/p/multi-language-translation/wiki/Documentation#Alterations_for_Script_Version_0.2.5 Important Information] about upgrading to this version...
 * *18th January 2010*: Version 0.2.4 of script released! By default, new site visitors will now be asked if they want to switch to their native language (auto-detected based on their browser / system settings). Alternatively, the webmaster can now specify an initial default language or just display the untranslated site; among other improvements... Please see the [http://code.google.com/p/multi-language-translation/wiki/Documentation#Alterations_for_Script_Version_0.2.4 Important Information] about upgrading to this version...
 * *1st December 2009*: The initial version of the [http://code.google.com/p/multi-language-translation/wiki/Documentation documentation] is now entirely complete! All feedback would be very welcome...
 * *29th November 2009:* Second release of the day - script version 0.2.3! All auto-translations of interface components added since a page loaded are now also stored, so they can be displayed instantly if needed later (until user reloads/revisits page).
 * *29th November 2009:* Version 0.2.2. of script released! This version features a couple of improvements - most notably, all translations completed since a page loaded are now stored; so that if the current language is changed, any existing translations are displayed instantly - until the user reloads/revisits the page.
 * *15th November 2009:* Version 0.2.1 of script released! This version includes a couple of minor bugfixes, and also a useful new feature - the original source text of a page region can now be displayed by users (if desired by the webmaster)...
 * *2nd November 2009:* Initial Open Source release (v0.2.0) of script.